manual execution guide (#1669)
smartcontractkit/documentation: src/content/ccip/concepts/manual-execution.mdx

---
section: ccip
date: Last Modified
title: "CCIP Manual Execution"
whatsnext:
  { "Manual execution guide": "/ccip/tutorials/manual-execution", "Learn CCIP best practices": "/ccip/best-practices" }
---

import { Aside, ClickToZoom, CopyText } from "@components"

<Aside type="note" title="Prerequisites">
  Read the CCIP [Concepts](/ccip/concepts) and [Architecture](/ccip/architecture) pages to understand all the concepts
  discussed on this page.
</Aside>

> In general, messages are successfully delivered and processed via CCIP, as detailed in the [Architecture](/ccip/architecture) page. CCIP has an built-in gas bumping mechanism called _Smart Execution_ to ensure users’ messages are reliably delivered to the destination blockchain (Read the [CCIP Execution latency](/ccip/architecture#ccip-execution-latency) section to learn more).
> However, some exceptional conditions may require users to manually execute the transaction on the destination blockchain:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, messages are successfully delivered and processed via CCIP as described in the [Architecture](/ccip/architecture) page. CCIP has a built-in gas bumping mechanism called _Smart Execution_ to ensure that messages are reliably delivered to the destination blockchain. Read the [CCIP Execution latency](/ccip/architecture#ccip-execution-latency) section to learn more about _Smart Execution_. However, some exceptional conditions might require users to manually execute the transaction on the destination blockchain:
```

>      - The receiver contract on the destination blockchain reverted due to an unhandled exception (for example, a logical error).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The receiver contract on the destination blockchain reverted due to an unhandled exception such as a logical error.
```

     - The receiver contract on the destination blockchain reverted due to the gas limit being insufficient to execute the triggered function (Note: The gas limit value is set in the [extraArgs](/ccip/api-reference/client#evmextraargsv1) param of the message).

>      - The message could not be executed on the destination chain within CCIP’s Smart Execution time window, currently set to 8 hours. This could happen, for example, during extreme network congestion and resulting gas spikes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - The message could not be executed on the destination chain within CCIP’s Smart Execution time window, which is currently set to 8 hours. This could happen, for example, during extreme network congestion and resulting gas spikes.
```

The flowchart below displays the process of a cross-chain transaction, detailing the steps involved in the manual execution:

<br />

<ClickToZoom src="/images/ccip/manual-execution.png" alt="Chainlink CCIP manual execution flowchart" />

## CCIP execution

> 1. A sender (a contract or EOA) initiates a CCIP message on the source blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A sender contract or EOA initiates a CCIP message on the source blockchain.
```

1. [CCIP Committing DON](/ccip/architecture#committing-don) awaits [finality](/ccip/concepts#finality) on the source blockchain.
1. Post finality, the [CCIP Committing DON](/ccip/architecture#committing-don) assembles a batch of eligible transactions, computes a Merkle root, and records it to the [CommitStore contract](/ccip/architecture#commit-store) on the destination blockchain.

> 1. Upon successful verification, the [Risk Management Network](/ccip/concepts#risk-management-network) blesses the committed Merkle root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. After successful verification, the [Risk Management Network](/ccip/concepts#risk-management-network) blesses the committed Merkle root.
```

> 1. Once the committed Merkle root is blessed, the [CCIP Executing DON](/ccip/architecture#executing-don) proceeds with the execution on the destination blockchain:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. After the committed Merkle root is blessed, the [CCIP Executing DON](/ccip/architecture#executing-don) proceeds with the execution on the destination blockchain:
```

>    - During the Smart Execution time window , the Executing DON assesses and, if necessary, adjusts the gas price (a process known as gas bumping) to facilitate successful transaction execution on the destination blockchain as part of the Smart Execution process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - During the Smart Execution time window, the Executing DON assesses and, if necessary, adjusts the gas price (a process known as gas bumping) to facilitate successful transaction execution on the destination blockchain as part of the Smart Execution process.
```

>    - If the Smart Execution time window has passed and the CCIP message has still not been executed, then Manual Execution is enabled (Read [below](/ccip/concepts/manual-execution#manual-execution)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If the Smart Execution time window has passed and the CCIP message has still not been executed, then Manual Execution is enabled. See the [Manual execution](/ccip/concepts/manual-execution#manual-execution) section for more details.
```

1. The execution on the destination blockchain works as follows:

   1. If the message involves token transfers, the tokens are first transferred to the receiver.

>       - If the receiver is an EOA, then this transaction is considered complete, with no further processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - If the receiver is an EOA, then this transaction is considered complete with no further processing.
```

>       - If the receiver is a smart contract, the [ccipReceive](/ccip/api-reference/ccip-receiver#ccipreceive) function is invoked after the token transfer. The ccipReceive function processes the CCIP message and any user-specified logic in the receiver contract. The execution of the CCIP message is atomic (all/none). If the ccipReceive function successfully executes, then all aspects of the transaction are complete, and there is no revert. If, however, there is an issue in the receiver execution due to insufficient gas limit or unhandled exceptions, the attempted token transfer will also revert. The transaction then becomes eligible for manual execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - If the receiver is a smart contract, the [ccipReceive](/ccip/api-reference/ccip-receiver#ccipreceive) function is invoked after the token transfer. The ccipReceive function processes the CCIP message and any user-specified logic in the receiver contract. The execution of the CCIP message is atomic (all or none). If the ccipReceive function successfully executes, then all aspects of the transaction are complete, and there is no revert. If, however, there is an issue in the receiver execution due to insufficient gas limit or unhandled exceptions, the attempted token transfer will also revert. The transaction then becomes eligible for manual execution.
```

>    1. If the message does not involve token transfers and only arbitrary messaging, then if the receiver execution fails due to gas limit/ unhandled exceptions, the transaction becomes eligible for manual execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. If the message does not involve token transfers, only arbitrary messaging, and the receiver execution fails due to gas limits or unhandled exceptions, the transaction becomes eligible for manual execution.
```

## Manual execution

As described above, a CCIP message becomes eligible for manual execution for various reasons. Manual execution means that a user has to manually trigger the execution of the destination transaction after the issue that caused manual execution has been resolved.

> When a CCIP message is eligible for manual execution, the [CCIP explorer](https://ccip.chain.link/) shows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a CCIP message is eligible for manual execution, the [CCIP explorer](https://ccip.chain.link/) shows the following information:
```

>     - _Ready for manual execution_ status.
>     - The possibility to override the gas limit and a _Trigger Manual Execution_ button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - _Ready for manual execution_ status
    - The possibility to override the gas limit and a _Trigger Manual Execution_ button
```

    <br />

    <ClickToZoom src="/images/ccip/manual-execution-status.jpg" alt="Chainlink CCIP manual execution status" />

Depending on the situation, you can take one of the following steps:

> - Insufficient gas limit: The executor (after connecting their wallet) can override the gas limit parameter (i.e., increase it for this particular execution) and trigger a manual execution. If this new gas limit override is sufficient, the transaction will go through successfully. **Note:** This gas limit override only applies to this manually executed transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Insufficient gas limit: The executor can connect their wallet, override the gas limit parameter, increase the gas limit for this particular execution, and trigger a manual execution. If this new gas limit override is sufficient, the transaction will go through successfully. **Note:** This gas limit override applies only to this manually executed transaction.
```

> - Unhandled exception (logical error) in the receiver contract: If the receiver contract is [upgradeable](https://blog.chain.link/upgradable-smart-contracts/), developers must correct the logic, re-deploy the logic contract, and then manually execute the same transaction. If the receiver contract is not upgradeable, developers must deploy a new receiver contract, and then users can send a new CCIP message. Non-upgradable contracts will not benefit from manual execution. **Note:** Always make sure to test your smart contracts thoroughly. We also advise implementing fallback mechanisms in the CCIP receiver contracts to manage unhandled exceptions gracefully (Read the [Defensive example](/ccip/tutorials/programmable-token-transfers-defensive) to learn more).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unhandled exception (logical error) in the receiver contract: If the receiver contract is [upgradeable](https://blog.chain.link/upgradable-smart-contracts/), developers must correct the logic, re-deploy the logic contract, and then manually execute the same transaction. If the receiver contract is not upgradeable, developers must deploy a new receiver contract, and then users can send a new CCIP message. Non-upgradable contracts will not benefit from manual execution. **Note:** Always make sure to test your smart contracts thoroughly. As a best practice, implement fallback mechanisms in the CCIP receiver contracts to manage unhandled exceptions gracefully. Read the [Defensive example](/ccip/tutorials/programmable-token-transfers-defensive) to learn more.
```

## Frequently Asked Questions

1. **Can anyone execute a transaction on the CCIP explorer even if they are not the initiator of the transaction?**

   Yes, any EOA can manually execute a CCIP message that is eligible for manual execution. However, the executing account must have sufficient native gas tokens (such as ETH on Ethereum or MATIC on Polygon) to cover the gas costs associated with the delivery of the CCIP message.

   <br />

1. **If a user sends multiple messages and the first message isn’t successfully delivered and goes into a _manual execution_ mode, does that mean all subsequent messages from the user will also be stuck?**

>    It depends. If a message goes into manual execution mode due to receiver errors (unhandled exceptions or gas limit issues), subsequent messages don’t get automatically blocked, unless they would encounter the same error. However, suppose a message goes into manual execution mode after the Smart Execution time window expires (currently 8 hrs). In that case, subsequent messages must wait for the first message to be processed to maintain the default sequence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   It depends. If a message goes into manual execution mode due to receiver errors (unhandled exceptions or gas limit issues), subsequent messages don’t get automatically blocked, unless they would encounter the same error. However, suppose a message goes into manual execution mode after the Smart Execution time window expires (currently 8 hours). In that case, subsequent messages must wait for the first message to be processed to maintain the default sequence.
```

   <br />

> 1. **If the maximum gas limit is 2M (2,000,000) on mainnet, but it turns out that the destination blockchain requires more than that, will an override of > 2M work even though the max gas limit is 2M?**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **If the maximum gas limit is 2M (2,000,000) on mainnet, but it turns out that the destination blockchain requires more than that, will an override of > 2M still work?**
```

   Yes, but only for this execution. This works because the gas limit for this execution instance isn’t passing through the CCIP validation for the gas limit, for which the CCIP executing DON pays the gas. However, if you consistently need more than 2M for your use case, please reach out to us via <CopyText text="support@chain.link" /> and let us know.

   <br />

1. **Will Chainlink Labs reimburse us for manual execution fees?**

>    Since most manual execution situations are due to insufficient gas limit or an unhandled exception in the receiver contract, Chainlink Labs does not reimburse these fees. If you are a dApp developer, please ensure you test thoroughly to avoid manual execs to the extent possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Since most manual execution situations are due to insufficient gas limit or an unhandled exception in the receiver contract, Chainlink Labs does not reimburse these fees. If you are a dApp developer, please ensure you test thoroughly to avoid manual executions to the extent possible.
```

   <br />

1. **Do I have to manually execute via the CCIP explorer? Are there any other ways to do this?**

   The CCIP explorer provides the easiest way to execute manually. It handles all the complexity of submitting the Merkle proof needed for successful transaction execution.

   <br />

1. **How do I know if my receiver error is due to a gas limit issue or an unhandled exception?**

>    If you see a _ReceiverError_ with a revert reason as empty (0x), this is likely due to a gas limit issue. You can look at the transaction trace for the destination transaction on a tool such as [tenderly](https://tenderly.co/), and you will likely see an _out of gas_ reason mentioned in such cases. Determine the gas limit that would work for your transaction and manually override it. Read the [manual execution](/ccip/tutorials/manual-execution) tutorial to analyze an example of an exception due to a low gas limit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If you see a _ReceiverError_ with a revert reason as empty (0x), this is likely due to a gas limit issue. You can look at the transaction trace for the destination transaction on a tool such as [Tenderly](https://tenderly.co/), and you will likely see an _out of gas_ reason mentioned in such cases. Determine the gas limit that would work for your transaction and manually override it. Read the [manual execution](/ccip/tutorials/manual-execution) tutorial to analyze an example of an exception due to a low gas limit.
```

- Decoupling CCIP Message Reception and Business Logic: We advise separating the reception of CCIP messages from the core business logic of the contract. Implementing 'escape hatches' or fallback mechanisms is recommended to gracefully manage situations where the business logic encounters issues. To explore this concept further, refer to the [Defensive example](/ccip/tutorials/programmable-token-transfers-defensive).
- Manual Execution by Any Account: Any account can manually execute a CCIP message that is eligible for manual execution, but the executing account must have sufficient native gas tokens (such as ETH on Ethereum or MATIC on Polygon) to cover the gas costs associated with the delivery of the CCIP message.
- Batching Support: In cases where a single transaction includes multiple CCIP messages, the system provides a convenient batching feature. This allows you to manually execute all failed CCIP messages within the transaction collectively rather than addressing each one individually.

> - Time Limitations in CCIP Explorer: Currently, the [CCIP explorer](https://ccip.chain.link/) does not support the manual execution of CCIP messages older than 48 hours. Please get in touch with us for assistance if you need to manually execute messages older than 48 hours on mainnets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: ok removed.
